In this lecture, you'll learn about the basic operation of routers and how they compare to switches. Routers
route,
that's why they're called routers,
and what that means is that they can direct traffic between your different IP subnets.
They're required to do that. To be able to route traffic from one IP subnet to another,
you're going to need a router to be able to do that.
They route traffic between our different IP subnets. IP is at Layer 3 of the OSI stack. So, a router
operates
at Layer 3 of the OSI model.
Obviously, it has physical interfaces on there as well.
So, it's also operating at Layer 1. It also needs to understand Layer 2 addresses, so it also operates
at Layer 2 as well.
Routers, actually, will normally be aware up to Layer 7 for advanced functions as well. But when
they're doing the job of routing between different IP subnets, they're operating at Layer 3.
So routers are termed as a Layer 3 device. To compare them with switches, routers are Layer 3
aware and can route traffic between different networks.
Switches are Layer 2 aware. They're not Layer 3 aware and can switch traffic between hosts on the
Local Area Network. Routers support many different types of interfaces such as Ethernet, Serial, ISDN, and
ADSL. Switches will typically only support Ethernet interfaces. Switches will typically have a lot more
ports than routers, and switches forward broadcast traffic. Routers don't forward broadcast traffic by default.
So let's go back to the slide, a couple of the things that I said
there are that routers support many more different types of ports than switches, and they'll usually have less
available ports than switches.
So if you remember, we had a look at a Cisco Catalyst 2960 switch, which had 48 ports when we did the
basics of switches. So it had 48 ports plus some uplinks on there, and they were all Ethernet ports.
If you have a look at the picture here, this is a Cisco 2800
series router,
and it's only got two built-in Ethernet ports. You see, there are four ports there, but one of them is a console
port, and another one is an auxiliary port. So, it only comes with two Ethernet ports compared to our
48 ports switch that we had a look at earlier.
But if you look to the right of those ports, you see that there are modular slots there.
So we can buy different types of interfaces, such as ADSL, Ethernet, etc., serial ports, and we can
put them into the router.
Okay,
moving on. Let's have a quick recap of switch operation.
In the diagram here, you can see we've got a building.
We've got a couple of switches in there.
All our hosts are on the 10.10.10.0/24 network. When that's the case,
they can all communicate with each other through our switches. When they're all in the same IP subnet,
there's no need to have a router there. But if one of those hosts had the IP address 10.10.11.10/24,
it's now on a different IP subnet, and it's not going to be able to
communicate with the other hosts on the 10.10.10 network
if we only have switches there. It's in another Layer 3 network,
so we need a Layer 3 device, a router, to be able to route traffic between those hosts.
So, we put a router into the infrastructure now.
It's aware of the 10.10.10 and the 10.10.11 networks, and it's going to be able to
route traffic between all the hosts on the network now.
Okay,
one other thing to tell you about here is that you can get advanced switches which are Layer 3 aware
and can route traffic between different IP subnets. When you get one of those Layer 3 aware switches,
it's known as a Layer 3 switch.
It still has a lot of characteristics that are similar to a normal switch though,
and that it will typically only support Ethernet interfaces,
and it will usually have more ports than routers.
So, looking at our diagram again. Now, you see that we only have switches in the network infrastructure, but
the switch at the bottom is a Layer 3 switch. Meaning, it is Layer 3 aware. It's aware of the
10.10.10 network and the 10.10.11 network, and it's able to route traffic between
them.
Now, you can actually do this on a Catalyst 2960 like you saw earlier.
Again, way back in the day, Layer 3 switches were expensive, but they've come down in price now. So
it is very common to have Layer 3 switches routing the traffic, which is within the different subnets
on your Local Area Network.
However, if your connection outside that campus, out to the Wide Area Network, is using an interface type which
is not Ethernet, then you would still require a normal traditional router for that traffic as well.